Welcome to the Law Association of New Zealand.
It looks like we've got everybody online.
We are hearing from you in regards to the Immigration
Enhanced Risk Management Amendment Bill.
We have 10 minutes with you this afternoon. That includes time for questions.
If you could keep that in mind, and I'll throw it over to you now.
Deborah, you're muted.
It happens to all of us, don't worry.
Sorry about that. Good afternoon, Madam Chair.
I'm Deborah Manning from the Law Association of New Zealand.
I'm joined by my colleagues, Richard, Puja, and Sush, and we are all
subject matter experts, I suppose, in immigration law.
I was having a look at your committee, and I was thinking what a difficult task it
must be for many of you, because the Immigration Act is
quite the piece of legislation and having quite a lot of
amendments done to it. Just what we thought we'd
do today is not speak for long, actually, and try and use most of
this time for Q&A for members of the select committee.
Just a couple of overall points.
Overall, we do consider that this bill has a lack of
justification for the proposals.
The changes to the refugee system could be achieved operationally,
and we should be looking at numbers in context.
New Zealand gets in about 10 days what the UK gets in a year in
terms of asylum claims. So
we get in a year what the UK gets in 10 days.
So, there's a tendency to try and sort of
conflate New Zealand's issues the same with our overseas neighbors, but we're on
such a different scale, and I think that is important.
And overall,
this is a bill trying to look at symptoms in the
immigration system that are a result of the settings by
that same immigration system. And I was thinking a good
analogy could be we have a bridge that's
collapsing under population strain.
And rather than managing the traffic across that bridge,
we're wanting to cut down on the bridge repairs as we don't want to pay for the
engineers. So we're not doing anything about the population going over the
bridge. In fact, we're probably increasing the population.
There's strain on the bridge. But rather than actually attending
to the causes of the strain on the bridge, we just want to cut back
on bridge safety.
So with that said,
I think that we'll just open up to the committee for Q&As.
Is that all right, colleagues?
Absolutely.
Yep.
Wonderful. Look, really appreciate that because we don't often get the opportunity.
Carl, did you no longer have a question? Was it addressed?
I do.
Yeah, it was addressed. Thank you.
Okay, great. I'll go next to Ricardo, and then we'll come-
Thank you very much and appreciate your thorough submission.
Oh, yeah. That's-
Would any of you be able to expand on the
part around removing the right to humanitarian appeals for temporary visitor and
visa holders? You may have heard the minister's
contribution that she's very confident that people will be granted a one-day work
or student visa,
so they can do an appeal. But, what concerns do you have on
this specific provision, and what do you think the impact will be
for people who may be facing life-threatening
conditions back in their home countries or just
challenges more broadly?
Yeah. So I've been tasked to tackle this one.
So yes, I understand the one-day work visa workaround, right?
But we shouldn't be really designing a system based on workarounds that are
absolutely discretionary and that people don't necessarily know that they can
actually ask for. And the bigger question is, what is behind
this change? There is absolutely
no business case that's been made for it.
We're actually only talking about just over 100 people that are going to
be very badly affected.
So in terms of the visitor visas, just to give some context,
there was a 40% success rate. That's very high.
This is a tough tribunal because you have to meet that standard of
exceptional circumstances of a humanitarian nature.
So 40% means that this is not an
appeal being abused. And over
40% of those were migrants from our Pacific neighbors.
Mm-hmm.
And when you look at those cases, we're talking about families that need
support from grandparents or aunts with children with disabilities and
so on.
Mm-hmm.
So
there's been no policy case or business case made for it.
There are ways to manage costs in terms of filing fees and so on.
And we are at a loss as to why this is being put up at
all.
Just briefly on the impact on children, would you mind expanding on that?
We heard from officials that obviously they take due diligence with the rights of
children, et cetera. But what impact do you see for children particularly,
that could arise as a result of these changes?
So again, I'm at pains to say, and we often need to say this in the New Zealand
context as we're such a small society, none of these critiques are personal.
Okay? And so we have a structural gap
now in terms of ensuring that the rights of children are being
adequately considered in our legal system.
And we're being asked to say,
well, look, particular officials will look at it downstream for a
deportation interview. That's not a structural
safeguard.
Those interviews are not recorded.
It's very hard to actually
get access to any kind of judicial review rights.
You don't have money to pay for those.
So there's no adequate safeguards to ensure that those
concerns and rights of the child have actually been taken into account adequately.
Thank you, Deborah. We have a question from Phil Twyford, and then we'll come back
to Carl Banks.
This is a sub.
Okay.
So the minister this morning-Really suggested that there
were large numbers of people who were
gaming the system by doing humanitarian appeals,
and she
tried to distinguish that from a certain number of other people
who were,
I don't know, more legit. Have you seen any evidence that there's some
kind of blow-out in data in terms of people gaming the
system?
I'll comment with Deborah as well.
So Deborah, just after you've said that, I'll make a point here as well.
Yeah.
So Deborah, go ahead.
So thank you. That gaming the system has not been made out in the
documentation, and I would not say a 40% success rate
is evidence of gaming the system.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Oh, sorry.
Sorry. I was just going to-
Go again
... off the back of both those questions, I think the minister has offered up
Section 61 and ministerial requests as a way
of offering some sort of consolation saying, "This is how-
That's right
... our international conventions will be considered.
This is where they're going to be taken into account." I think the important thing
to remember here is people don't actually even have to consider a Section
61 request in Immigration New Zealand.
The minister doesn't even have to consider a ministerial request, and that can be
absolutely declined. And at that point, we have absolutely no way of
ensuring that international conventions and New Zealand's obligations
as part of the global economy and the global
international system are actually being considered here.
And there's also no way to guarantee that any future government and any future
minister will handle things the same way this current minister is saying that she
will. So having a proper process with the judiciary
currently with the IPT ensures that there's a fair system no matter who the
government is.
Thank you, Pooja. I've got a question from Carl Bates, and if we get time, we've
got one from Ricardo and another one from Phil.
Thanks very much, Chair. It seems as though the perspective that you
come from is that there should be a right,
or an automatic right even, that
parents of families in New Zealand who have
migrated
for whatever reason, have challenges with their family or children in New Zealand
should have some automatic right to get-
No
... into. Well, that's certainly the perspective it seems to come from because
40% is still 40%, and
when people migrate to New Zealand,
with that should come an
expectation that
there are standards, there are rules in which
families that want to then move with those individuals
have to meet. What's the question?
Carl, you're right. Agreed. So we look at perspective here
with respect.
Bit of your own medicine, Ricardo.
We're talking at 300 appeals and how many
tens of thousands of visitor visas are being issued each year.
Just for India alone, I got an OIA 160,000.
So we're talking a tiny number of people actually using that appeal
right. And the criteria is exceptional
circumstances of a humanitarian nature.
And I absolutely agree about the integrity of the system,
absolutely, but you have to show the case for it,
and there's no evidence to show that there's gaming.
In fact, if you look at the specialist tribunal's report, they talk
about some increases due to operational issues with
immigration.
Thank you. We have now reached the end of our time with you this afternoon, but
we really appreciate the technical and very helpful nature of your
submission. Thank you.
Thank you.
Appreciate your time.
Can we move on now to the Migrant Workers Association who are joining us via
Zoom?
I unfortunately don't have the names of the attendees, but we will discover.
Anu. Lovely. Welcome.
Kia ora. Kia ora.
Thank you.
We have 10 minutes with you this afternoon.
That includes time for questions, and we'll hand over to you now.
Sure.
Thanks for this opportunity, and I won't go through every
single part of my submission. I will just focus on the
changes relating to migrant exploitation and non-compliant employers
since I think
other submissions haven't touched that.
And also, that's the work that we have largely been doing.
So while on paper and in principle it
looks good that now we could potentially have
exploiting employers, offending employers' sentences
increased from seven to 10 years imprisonment.
But
looking at recent history, how many
of those exploiting employers have actually reached as far
as being sentenced?
And also,
our submission is that
we actually need to deal with the root cause here rather than
tinker around the edges and deal with symptoms.
There've been a few changes in the recent past as well
where it's been claimed that it will be tougher for
employers and will be able to prevent or eradicate migrant
exploitation. But we see the exact opposite on the front lines
and the work that we do.
So we would actually like to see
some form of legislation whereby the practice of attaching
our migrant workers to single employers is stopped.
And
over the years, we've made many a submission where we've also proposed
that should there be attachment,
maybe it can be considered that those workers are attached to a region
where we have a certain skill shortage or they are
attached to
a profession or a certain occupation based on their skill set
rather than being attached to a single employer.
Because as we know, as our Employment Relations Act already
acknowledges the huge imbalance of power that exists
in the employer-employee relationship, and then we go and
tie those workers to single employers, that only gives
greater power to the employers, and unfortunately, some rogue employers
go and use that to the max.
And I would also like to reference
a report released in August 2024 by the Human
Rights Commission, where they are making
aThis recommendation that
we should have a focus on Te Tiriti of Waitangi and human
rights to get to the root cause of the
scheme's flaws.
So I think as a bare minimum, we need to pay attention to this Human
Rights Commission report, and there are many other reports which I could go on and
reference, but I'm mindful of time.
There was also a report by the Productivity Commission, and
there is
many reports by
university researchers and also
2017-'18, and the government at the time commissioned
a report and
it saddens me to say none of the findings of that report were
implemented either. So I guess I'll leave it at that
and
invite any questions.
Thank you very much. Our first question is from Ricardo Minniti.
Just two very brief questions. Kia ora Anu, thank you for your submission.
So am I hearing that you're saying that
the changes relating to migrant exploitation and non-compliant employers have no
evidential basis to deter employers from exploiting when many of
them don't actually make it to
that level and to get a sentence, basically?
Yes, that's absolutely right. And quite often or more
than often,
what lets the whole process down is that
our migrant workers don't actually have sufficient evidences
of their own exploitation because the
abuse of power by the employer purely stops the victims from
collecting those evidences. It's just how it's all set up.
Yeah. Thank you. And just secondly, on the changes around the request for
identification, shifting from
liable for deportation to breach of visa conditions,
or expanding to that.
What have you observed in your time at the front lines and as an advocate
in relationship to how compliance officers operate and/or
engage with the community? And would you mind expanding on your concerns that you
put in your written submission?
Yeah. Sure. So
most of the times,
workers who are on accredited employer work visa specifically,
they
can be in breach of their conditions, not through any fault of their own.
It would be, to give you some examples, employer is forcing
that worker to work from a different location, from a different
business. They are paying them less than what they should be
as per their visa conditions. So those people now could
potentially be punished for something that they have
not instigated. It's the exploiting
employer who is putting undue pressure on these workers to
do these things, and then that makes them
breach their own visa conditions.
So I think we
should not remain superficial. We should look at the root cause here
rather than just keep dealing with the symptoms.
I have time for one more?
Yes, you do.
Yeah. Thank you.
Yeah.
And do you have any reflections, Anu, on from the people
you've worked with, what has been their experiences with the
compliance team, and do you feel like at every point they've been
treated with respect and dignity, or do you have any concerns around
the culture
in which the compliance team engages with migrant communities?
Yeah. Okay, so we have a mixed
bag here.
In our experience, there are cases where
people feel like they've almost born raided, for example.
And then at the other end, we have some compliance officers
who are quite understanding, and especially when there is a good
immigration professional involved representing
the applicant or the visa holder.
In those situations, the compliance officers tend to be a little bit more
understanding, and then they do back off when they realize there's a good
professional involved. But like I said, we've had cases.
I was listening to earlier submissions, and Ricardo, you mentioned
checkpoints. We have had experience of that
where people without visas
they're going somewhere, and they've stopped at a checkpoint, and next
thing they know, they've been detained and then put on a plane back to
their citizenship country. So those things do happen.
So a mixed bag there. And the other point that I want to connect
with the deportation side of things and the migrant exploitation,
what we see is that most of the people on AEWV,
they come here to work and to earn a decent living, and
the ones who are not eligible for residence know that, and they are
mentally prepared to return home once they've earned and gained that
experience. But what's happening is that they're not being allowed the
opportunity to get the experience or to earn what they
should be earning. So when the
employer suddenly terminates them unfairly or
things go wrong, they are still in debt.
So that's when they can potentially become overstayers, and many
of them do. So it just
feeds into that box as well. So I think
it's better to prevent exploitation in the first place
so we do not create further overstayers.
Sorry, Anu, do you mind if I ask a clarifying question on that?
When you said that they come here on a AEWV and
know that they are here short-term but then
get let go unfairly-But are still in debt.
Could you explain that and then what that-
Yeah
... has got to do with the piece of legislation we're talking about?
Sure. So exploitative employers, even
before their EWV holders arrive here,
they have agents in other countries who scam
these workers and premiums are taken from them, and it's not small
amounts, it's tens of thousands of dollars, which is then used
to pay their wages when they start work here.
And once that pot of money is gone to zero,
that's when those workers are let go of.
That, okay, unless you-
Okay
... pay us more, we can't pay you your wages.
Or worse scenarios, they arrive here and the job doesn't
actually exist, so they don't-
And so can you please, do you mind just addressing in that particular case
whether the legislation, as you see it,
how that would change what's currently happening?
Okay, so because the employers are not directly recruiting
those migrant workers, there are agents-
Right
... unregulated agents offshore.
They don't fall into anyone's jurisdiction, so-
Right. Okay
... no action can be taken against them.
Thank you. That's helpful.
So the employers are scot-free as well.
While they are in cahoots with the agents, but it's nearly
impossible to prove that link.
That's really helpful to have that. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Anu, for your time and your submission.
We really appreciate your participation in the process.
Thank you.
Okay.
We'll move on now to the New Zealand Association for Migration and Investment.
We have Simon Laurent and Harris Xu.
Welcome, Simon. I'm not sure if we've got Harris joining separately,
but we will get going. We're under a bit of time pressure, if that's okay.
We have 10 minutes-
That's-
... with you, and that includes time for questions.
Perfectly fine. And good afternoon, everyone.
Because of the time,
as the chair of NZAMI, I'm going to speak to one issue, not the
whole bill. And Harris Xu is going to speak to another one, and then we'll
invite questions. So the issue I want to address is
clause 18 of the bill, which
proposes enabling Immigration New
Zealand to serve deportation liability notices
to people who are liable by email if a
physical address can't be found or if
INZ doesn't have a current physical address.
We strongly oppose this.
The reason for that is that the notice, obviously, is a
notification. It's telling people, in particular, of their rights,
rights of appeal. And if they don't get them,
the notice, then
obviously they're going to run out of time because the time limits are quite tight,
and they'll miss their right of appeal entirely, so they'll be disenfranchised.
Now, the thing is that Section 386A of the act
specifically says any
notice that is to be served, and the point is
deportation liability notices have to be served.
It says they must be served by personal service or by registered post, and
the reason for that is because you can clearly identify that the person has
got it,
such as that you get a paper trail for the track and trace of
a courier delivery.
Sending by email
is, I believe, really much more suspect because
if a person has abandoned an email address that they don't use anymore,
then there's really no way of knowing if they ever saw this email that was sent to
them, and it's a critical one.
And so this is
compounded by the introduction through
the Fiscal Sustainability Bill last
year.
And, well, in fact, I'm sorry, I'll backtrack on that.
It's compounded by the extension of the
periods for which people can be liable for deportation under the current bill,
so that if someone's been around for a number of years, has incurred
an offense which would make them liable for deportation, and some of
those, yes, could potentially be very serious, but they're only
slated to the maximum term of imprisonment in most cases that
can be applied to them.
Then those people may have moved on and may have moved a couple of
addresses, physical addresses. They may have shifted their email address.
They may have used another one. So they will be completely cut out of the
picture. And in my view, there is no
justification, first of all, for having this
provision in place, and it
is a form of disenfranchisement. The
alternative we suggest is that the clause
should be amended to require due diligence on the
part of Immigration New Zealand to locate
the person
physically, and that they've
documented that they've done so
before resorting to service by email.
That's all I have to say on that point. Harris, you want to carry on?
Harris is online, just no camera. So Harris, if we can hear you, that'll be
fine.
Yes. I can hear you guys. Thank you.
Fine.
Thanks.
Go for it.
Thank you, guys. I appear as the policy chair for NZAMI.
So
NZAMI is particularly concerned about the proposal to remove humanitarian
appeal rights from visitor visa holders and temporary or
interim visa holders who have pleaded guilty to, have been
found guilty of, or been convicted of an offense after the
visa was granted. Our concern is that this removes an important
independent safeguard from people whose circumstances may be genuinely
exceptional.
Visitor visa holders are not always tourists.
They may be partners to New Zealand citizensDependent children, elderly
parents, grandparents, or family members affected by illness,
bereavement, family violence,
or sudden changes in circumstances.
The Immigration and Protection Tribunal already applies a high threshold.
A person must show exceptional humanitarian circumstances.
They must also show that allowing them to remain would not be
contrary to the public interest.
So this is not a loophole. It's a safety valve for exceptional
cases. If this appeal right is removed,
humanitarian issues will not disappear.
They will be pushed into less transparent pathways,
which are good reasons submissions, Section 61 request,
ministerial intervention, ombudsman complaints, or judicial review.
None of these is an adequate substitute for independent
merits-based appeal.
NZAMI is also concerned that relying on a guilty plea,
a person may plead guilty
and later receive a discharge without conviction.
In that case, the court has decided that the consequence of the conviction
will be out of all proportion to the offending.
Immigration laws should not then impose severe consequences by
relying on the earlier guilty plea.
NZAMI therefore asks the committee to retain
humanitarian appeal rights for temporary visa holders.
If the committee is not minded to retain them in full, the bill should at least
preserve appeal rights where there are children, family unit
issues, medical or vulnerable factors, discharge without
conviction, or other exceptional humanitarian circumstances require an independent
assessment.
So to conclude this, a credible immigration system is not
built by choosing between enforcement and fairness.
It's built by insisting on both.
Thank you.
Thank you. I have a question from Riccardo Menini, who's matched.
Thank you very much for your comments.
Just on the electronic service of deportation liability notices.
To put it bluntly, what do you think
will be the impact on the ground and for migrants
should this go ahead?
You'll end up with people who
are not aware that they've been made liable for deportation,
and if they committed a criminal offense, for example, they may not
necessarily know that that step has been taken for quite a long time
afterwards,
because immigration resolutions is backed up.
So what will happen is that they will not know that they
have a right of appeal. They lose the right of appeal.
The next thing they know,
they've been somehow located maybe
and they're served with a deportation order without any
warning. That's one outcome.
The other is the loss of right of appeal
could well result in
people discovering through another means, and that does happen, that
they are liable for deportation. They have no right of appeal.
So they will then have to file a ministerial.
And so I can see that there are going to be more requests
to the Minister of Immigration to try and rectify a
situation which should not have occurred in the first place.
Just as a follow-up on that, if I may.
Yeah, if you can make it succinct, that'd be great.
Just on the ministerial intervention requests that also you noted with the
humanitarian appeals, that's going to kind of clog that
system. What have you found in terms of the
engagement with the Associate Minister of Immigration's office in
relationship to the transparency, the reasons even considering
those requests, and what do you think this may mean for their profession and for
communities affected when trying to use those avenues instead of
the IPT, for example?
Harris, do you want to speak to that?
Yes. Ministerial interventions
under the Immigration Act, subject to Immigration Act, and the
ministers, they have the absolute discretion to make a decision.
So, in all the cases I've dealt with,
the minister's
decision never discloses a reason.
If it's refused, the minister
will
just not disclose reason, and they will just invoke absolute discretion.
So there's no way to find out what the rationale
is behind that decision.
And very difficult to file review proceedings.
Yes. I think there is a Court of Appeal judgment
basically upheld that in favor of the minister.
Thank you.
Thank you. That's all the time we have for your submission today, but appreciate
your involvement in the process. And thank you for your submission.
Thank you. Appreciate your time.
Much appreciated. Thank you.
Thank you.
We now have Business New Zealand on Zoom.
We have Rachel Simpson joining us. Welcome, Rachel.
We have 10 minutes with you. That includes time for questions, and we'll hand it
over to you now.
Thank you, Madam Chair and members of the committee, for the opportunity
to appear today. We broadly support the Immigration Amendment Bill and its
intent to ensure the immigration system remains effective, responsive to
evolving risk, and maintains public confidence.
Overall, our immigration system works well.
Our submission focuses on a small number of areas where we believe the bill could
be refined. First,
we're concerned about the proposal to extend employer infringement periods out to
six years. We consider this timeframe disproportionate and potentially
inconsistent with principles of procedural fairness.
We believe a more balanced approach would be to strengthen the
information-gathering obligations and require information to be
provided within a defined statutory timeframe so investigations can
be resolved promptly.
Secondly, we raise some concerns about the breadth of proposed
information-sharing provisions.
While we support modern, efficient digital government services,
we think there are moreways to verify entitlements,
including greater use of existing digital identity tools and
Immigration New Zealand's ongoing digital services program, rather than
providing broad access to personal immigration information across
publicly funded services.
And finally, we would just raise the
awareness of the committee to the proposed increase in
imprisonment terms.
In the fizzy bill that
preceded this one that was set at seven years, and in this bill, it's been set at
10. So we're keen to ensure there is consistency and
proportionality in the criminal aspects of the
Immigration Act.
Thank you for that, and happy to take questions.
Thank you. Do appreciate a succinct submission.
We have a question from Riccardo Meneghello.
Thank you very much. And I note that you didn't comment on this specific change
in your written submission, but many employers have workers
with, say, children and family members who may be in precarious immigration
situations. And those family members or children may
be in need of making humanitarian appeals in order for them to stay
with the worker that the employer wants to retain.
Do you have any concerns that with the changes to the humanitarian appeals, that it
may affect employers' ability to retain workers?
So we're very keen to make sure that employer is able to retain
those workers. And in regards to the humanitarian appeals,
my understanding of the bill is that there are still provisions in place in terms
of ministerial decisions that can be taken around some of that.
We do understand the
reasons around why some of those changes have been made,
and we accept that immigration law needs to be able to
respond to changing circumstances.
And at the moment,
we see immigration needing to shift to meet some of those global challenges.
So,
absolutely, retention of skilled workers is a key priority.
We've been very welcoming of initiatives such as residency
pathways for people on work visas that now cover things like
trade and technician pathways, and the families of those workers
are covered under those provisions.
I think level three and above, they're able to bring
their families in. So when we look across the totality of the immigration
settings at the moment,
those that are coming through on those work visas in those jobs that we
particularly need them to be doing
now have pathway residency that they didn't have a year
ago under previous settings.
Thank you, Rachel. We have a question from Carl Bates.
Thanks, Rachel, as always, for your submission to the committee.
On your point around the 10 years and the seven years, appreciating that
we've already passed
that piece of legislation, what is your view on whether
it should be seven or 10 years?
Parking for a moment the fact that we have already passed that bill.
So in terms of where that sentencing is set, it's really about
proportionality across the crimes.
And
I must admit, I'm not a Crimes Act expert, but would suggest seven years on that.
Acknowledging that if it is set at 10 years, that it also
is captured by some of the other provisions in the bill, which will enable
deportation if the full sentences are imposed.
So you're more interested in us ensuring consistency, but
you're asking us to go away and make sure that's proportional?
Yes.
Yep.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Rachel. Do we have any further questions from the committee?
Thank you, Rachel. Look, can I always say that it's not a reflection of lack of
interest in your submission. It's usually a reflection of how
technical and helpful your submission is.
We have no further questions for you.
Appreciate your participation in the process, and really thank you for
your submission.
Thank you for your time.
Okay.
Committee, we have
our earlier submitter that was not able to
join us, David Ryken, who is ready for us now.
So we will hear from David Ryken
this stage.
Sorry. Thank you, Madam Chair. Can you now hear me?
Yes, thank you.
Sorry.
Welcome, David. We have five minutes with you, and that includes time for
questions, so we'll hand it to you now.
Thank you.
I don't intend to go through my written submissions.
I focused-
Wonderful.
Take it as read.
Yes. I focused
only on two, the
lengthening of the Section 161 periods.
I'm not going to talk much about that except I
would urge the committee to seriously consider whether or not that will really have
any deterrent effect
at all.
I have practiced in deportation law for 30 years, and I've
never yet had a client who knew about the possibility of the
liability when they committed the offense. It simply isn't out there.
I would welcome Immigration to point it out in their grant letters, but then
that will only filter down to the person who receives the grant
letter, and the children
might not know about it.
The other thing that my written submission, and I'm
grateful to the Law Association for giving the detail, is the
loss of the
overseas appeals. And it takes us back to the beginning of my
career in the early '90s, when that
was a ministerial
function under
Roger Maxwell, Bill Birch, and Ossie Malcolm.
And then we set up the Removal Review
Authority-Who heard the
overstayer appeals.
And so we've had that now for 35 years.
Removal Review Authority and now the Immigration Protection Tribunal.
I am deeply concerned about the loss of this, and I heard
the response that
you indicate that the minister's indicated a one-day work visa in
order to let the period run.
So we've got to then
obtain the unchallengeable exercise of the
discretion of the Honorable Minister to give a one-day visa
in order to lodge an appeal for a visitor
who is-- And I'm really quite opposed to
legal processes being used for one thing,
to work for one day in order to obtain an appeal right.
I think that's crazy.
We do have one-day appeals and long-term
overstayers. Sometimes we've used that.
For example, my office has done quite a number of people from cases
from Pasifika to Tuvaluans. Sometimes they're here for many
years, and then we'd get the one-day visa.
And the
idea of the Associate Minister's office is that we will then do
a full-blown appeal, and the tribunal will then look at the
interface with the locality, the effect on the
children, the medical issues for the
Tuvaluans.
I'm deeply concerned about, and I really think
we have to rethink this.
For example, we had a woman from
the Punjab who had a
child already resident. And in some ways, I'm responding
to the Honorable Member Twyford's response.
Things change.
She was kicked out of
her home with her husband because she had a disabled child.
Fast forward a few years, and she has a stroppy
60 IQ child with autism,
and her mother had been coming down.
Now, this is just an example of how the
opportunity to do an appeal
for an overstayer appeal works.
We threw out the humanitarian category in about
2001. It's referenced in the Law Association's submissions.
We have no other way of,
shall we say,
fixing
a problem or no other escape valve.
Australia does, Canada does, lots of other countries do.
If we take away what is
a really important, and I think Deborah's
right, it's about 100 appeals. My office would probably do three
or four a year,
where we have some really important
humanitarian issue that can't be resolved any other way.
We don't have a category to help
a woman like my Punjabi woman.
We threw away the humanitarian category in
2001.
David, am I able to interrupt you there?
Unfortunately, we have reached the end of our time with you.
We really appreciate your written submission as well.
It's very helpful-
Thank you
... along with your oral submission.
So thank you for participating in the process.
And we'll move into our private session now. Thank you, David.
Thank you.